add tutorial for RAG with DeepSeek R1 model on Sagemaker (#3455)
opensearch-project/ml-commons: docs/tutorials/aws/RAG_with_DeepSeek_R1_model_on_Bedrock.md

# Topic

> This tutorial introduces how to build RAG in Amazon managed OpenSearch with [DeepSeek R1 model](https://huggingface.co/deepseek-ai/DeepSeek-R1).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial shows you how to implement retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) in Amazon OpenSearch with the [DeepSeek R1 model](https://huggingface.co/deepseek-ai/DeepSeek-R1).
```

> If you are not using Amazon OpenSearch, you can refer to [deepseek_connector_chat_blueprint](https://github.com/opensearch-project/ml-commons/blob/main/docs/remote_inference_blueprints/deepseek_connector_chat_blueprint.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are not using Amazon OpenSearch, you can use the DeepSeek connector chat blueprint directly. For more information, see [the blueprint](https://github.com/opensearch-project/ml-commons/blob/main/docs/remote_inference_blueprints/deepseek_connector_chat_blueprint.md).
```

> Note: You should replace the placeholders with prefix `your_` with your own value

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note: Replace the placeholders starting with the prefix `your_` with your own values.
```

# Steps

## 0. Preparation

> ### Deploy DeepSeek R1 model to Bedrock

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Deploy the DeepSeek R1 model to Amazon Bedrock
```

> Follow this [notebook](https://github.com/DennisTraub/deepseekr1-on-bedrock/blob/main/deepseek-bedrock.ipynb) to deploy DeepSeek R1 model to Bedrock.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Follow this [notebook](https://github.com/DennisTraub/deepseekr1-on-bedrock/blob/main/deepseek-bedrock.ipynb) to deploy the DeepSeek R1 model to Amazon Bedrock.
```

> Note the Bedrock DeepSeek R1 model ARN. This will be used in following steps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note the Bedrock DeepSeek R1 model ARN; you'll use it in the following steps.
```

> ### Create OpenSearch Cluster

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Create an OpenSearch cluster
```

> Go to AWS OpenSearch console UI and create OpenSearch domain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Go to the AWS OpenSearch console UI and create an OpenSearch domain.
```

> Note the domain ARN and URL. They will be used in following steps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note the domain ARN and URL; you'll use them in the following steps.
```

> ## 1. Create IAM role to invoke Sagemaker model

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## 1. Create an IAM role to invoke a Sagemaker model
```

Reviewer: Should this be "Amazon Bedrock" instead of "Sagemaker"?

> To invoke Bedrock model, we need to create an IAM role with proper permission.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To invoke an Amazon Bedrock model, you must create an IAM role with the appropriate permissions.
```

> This IAM role will be configured in connector. Connector will use this role to invoke DeepSeek model deployed on Bedrock.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This IAM role will be configured in the connector. The connector will use this role to invoke the DeepSeek model deployed on Amazon Bedrock.
```

> Go to IAM console, create IAM role `my_invoke_bedrock_deepseek_model_role` with:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Go to the AWS IAM console, create a new IAM role named `my_invoke_bedrock_deepseek_model_role`, and add the following policies:
```

- Custom trust policy:
```
{
    "Version": "2012-10-17",
    "Statement": [
        {
            "Effect": "Allow",
            "Principal": {
                "Service": "es.amazonaws.com"
            },
            "Action": "sts:AssumeRole"
        }
    ]
}
```

> - Permission

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Permission:
```

```
{
    "Version": "2012-10-17",
    "Statement": [
        {
            "Action": [
                "bedrock:InvokeModel"
            ],
            "Effect": "Allow",
            "Resource": "your_DeepSeek_R1_model_ARN_"
        }
    ]
}
```

> Note the role ARN. It will be used in following steps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note the role ARN; you'll use it in the following steps.
```

> ## 2. Configure IAM role in OpenSearch

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## 2. Configure an IAM role in OpenSearch
```

> ### 2.1 Create IAM role for Signing create connector request

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 2.1 Create an IAM role for signing the create connector request
```

Generate a new IAM role specifically for signing your create connector request.

> Create IAM role `my_create_bedrock_deepseek_connector_role` with 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create an IAM role named `my_create_bedrock_deepseek_connector_role` with the following policies:  
```

> - Custom trust policy. Note: `your_iam_user_arn` is the IAM user which will run `aws sts assume-role` in step 3.1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Custom trust policy:
```

```
{
    "Version": "2012-10-17",
    "Statement": [
        {
            "Effect": "Allow",
            "Principal": {
                "AWS": "your_iam_user_arn"
            },
            "Action": "sts:AssumeRole"
        }
    ]
}

> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```
Note: `your_iam_user_arn` is the IAM user which will run `aws sts assume-role` in step 3.1.
````

> - permission

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Permission:
```

```
{
    "Version": "2012-10-17",
    "Statement": [
        {
            "Effect": "Allow",
            "Action": "iam:PassRole",
            "Resource": "your_iam_role_arn_created_in_step1"
        },
        {
            "Effect": "Allow",
            "Action": "es:ESHttpPost",
            "Resource": "your_opensearch_domain_arn_created_in_step0"
        }
    ]
}
```

> Note this role ARN. It will be used in following steps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note this role ARN; you'll use it in the following steps.
```

> ### 2.2 Map backend role

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 2.2 Map a backend role
```

> 1. Log in to your OpenSearch Dashboard and navigate to the "Security" page, which you can find in the left-hand menu.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Log in to OpenSearch Dashboards and select **Security** from the left navigation.
```

> 2. Then click "Roles" on security page (you can find it on left-hand), then find "ml_full_access" role and click it. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Select **Roles**, then select the **ml_full_access** role. 
```

> 3. On "ml_full_access" role detail page, click "Mapped users", then click "Manage mapping". Paste IAM role ARN created in step 2.1 to backend roles part.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. On the **ml_full_access** role details page, select **Mapped users**, then select **Manage mapping**. Enter the IAM role ARN created in Step 2.1 in the backend roles.
```

> Click "Map", then the IAM role configured successfully in your OpenSearch cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Select **Map**. 
The IAM role will be successfully configured in your OpenSearch cluster.
```

![Alt text](images/semantic_search/mapping_iam_role_arn.png)

> ## 3. Create Connector

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## 3. Create  a connector
```

> Find more details on [connector](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/ml-commons-plugin/remote-models/connectors/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For information about creating a connector, see [Connectors](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/ml-commons-plugin/remote-models/connectors/).
```

> ### 3.1 Get temporary credential of the role created in step 2.1:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 3.1 Get a temporary credential for the role created in step 2.1
```

> Use the credential of IAM user used in Step 2.1 to assume role

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the credential of the IAM user used in Step 3.1 to assume the role:
```

```
aws sts assume-role --role-arn your_iam_role_arn_created_in_step2.1 --role-session-name your_session_name
```

> Copy the temporary credential from response and configure in `~/.aws/credentials` like this

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Copy the temporary credential from the response and configure it in `~/.aws/credentials` as follows:
```

```
[default]
AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID=your_access_key_of_role_created_in_step2.1
AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY=your_secret_key_of_role_created_in_step2.1
AWS_SESSION_TOKEN=your_session_token_of_role_created_in_step2.1
```

> ### 3.2 Create connector

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 3.2 Create a connector
```

> Run this python code with the temporary credential configured in `~/.aws/credentials`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Run the following python code with the temporary credential configured in `~/.aws/credentials`:
```

  "version": "1.0",
  "protocol": "aws_sigv4",
  "credential": {
    "roleArn": "your_iam_role_arn_created_in_step1"
  },
  "parameters": {
    "service_name": "bedrock",
    "region": "your_bedrock_model_region",
    "model_id": "your_deepseek_bedrock_model_arn",
    "temperature": 0,
    "max_gen_len": 4000
  },
  "actions": [
    {
      "action_type": "PREDICT",
      "method": "POST",
      "url": "https://bedrock-runtime.us-east-1.amazonaws.com/model/${parameters.model_id}/invoke",
      "headers": {
        "content-type": "application/json"
      },
      "request_body": "{ \"prompt\": \"<｜begin▁of▁sentence｜><｜User｜>${parameters.inputs}<｜Assistant｜>\", \"temperature\": ${parameters.temperature}, \"max_gen_len\": ${parameters.max_gen_len} }",
      "post_process_function": "\n      return '{' +\n               '\"name\": \"response\",'+\n               '\"dataAsMap\": {' +\n                  '\"completion\":\"' + escape(params.generation) + '\"}' +\n             '}';\n    "
    }
  ]
}

headers = {"Content-Type": "application/json"}

r = requests.post(url, auth=awsauth, json=payload, headers=headers)
print(r.status_code)
print(r.text)
```

> The script will output connector id.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The script will output a connector ID:
```

> sample output

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```
{"connector_id":"HnS5sJQBVQUimUskjpFl"}
```

> Note connector id. It will be used in next step.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note the connector ID; you'll use it in the next step.
```

> ## 4. Create Model and test

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## 4. Create and test a model
```

> Login your OpenSearch Dashboard, open DevTools, then run these

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Log in to OpenSearch Dashboards, open the DevTools console, and run the following requests to create and test a model.
```

> 1. Create model group

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Create a model group:
```

```
POST /_plugins/_ml/model_groups/_register
{
    "name": "Bedrock DeepSeek model",
    "description": "Test model group for Bedrock DeepSeek model"
}
```

> Sample output

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The response contains the model group ID:
```

```
{
  "model_group_id": "Vylgs5QBts7fa6bylR0v",
  "status": "CREATED"
}
```

> 2. Register model

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Register the model:
```

```
POST /_plugins/_ml/models/_register
{
  "name": "Bedrock DeepSeek R1 model",
  "function_name": "remote",
  "description": "DeepSeek R1 model on Bedrock",
  "model_group_id": "Vylgs5QBts7fa6bylR0v",
  "connector_id": "KHS7s5QBVQUimUskoZGp"
}
```

> Sample output

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The response contains the model ID:
```

```
{
  "task_id": "hOS7s5QBFSAM-Wczv7KD",
  "status": "CREATED",
  "model_id": "heS7s5QBFSAM-Wczv7Kb"
}
```

> 3. Deploy model

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Deploy the model:
```

```
POST /_plugins/_ml/models/heS7s5QBFSAM-Wczv7Kb/_deploy
```

> Sample output

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The response contains a task ID for the deployment operation:
```

```
{
  "task_id": "euRhs5QBFSAM-WczTrI6",
  "task_type": "DEPLOY_MODEL",
  "status": "COMPLETED"
}
```

> 4. Predict

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Test the model:
```

```
POST /_plugins/_ml/models/heS7s5QBFSAM-Wczv7Kb/_predict
{
  "parameters": {
    "inputs": "hello"
  }
}
```

> Sample response

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The response contains inference results:
```

```
{
  "inference_results": [
    {
      "output": [
        {
          "name": "response",
          "dataAsMap": {
            "completion": """<think>

</think>

Hello! How can I assist you today? 😊"""
          }
        }
      ],
      "status_code": 200
    }
  ]
}
```

> ## 5. RAG

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## 5. Configure RAG
```

> ### 5.1 create search pipeline

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 5.1 Create a search pipeline
```

> Create search pipeline with [RAG processor](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/search-plugins/search-pipelines/rag-processor/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create search pipeline with a [RAG processor](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/search-plugins/search-pipelines/rag-processor/):
```

```
PUT /_search/pipeline/my-conversation-search-pipeline-deepseek-bedrock
{
  "response_processors": [
    {
      "retrieval_augmented_generation": {
        "tag": "Demo pipeline",
        "description": "Demo pipeline Using DeepSeek R1",
        "model_id": "heS7s5QBFSAM-Wczv7Kb",
        "context_field_list": [
          "text"
        ],
        "system_prompt": "You are a helpful assistant.",
        "user_instructions": "Generate a concise and informative answer in less than 100 words for the given question"
      }
    }
  ]
}
```
### 5.2 create vector database

> Follow this [neural search tutorial](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/search-plugins/neural-search-tutorial/) to create embedding model, K-NN index `my-nlp-index`, and ingest data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Follow the [neural search tutorial](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/search-plugins/neural-search-tutorial/) to create an embedding model and a k-NN index. Then ingest data into the index:
```

{"text": "Chart and table of population level and growth rate for the Austin metro area from 1950 to 2023. United Nations population projections are also included through the year 2035.\\nThe current metro area population of Austin in 2023 is 2,228,000, a 2.39% increase from 2022.\\nThe metro area population of Austin in 2022 was 2,176,000, a 2.79% increase from 2021.\\nThe metro area population of Austin in 2021 was 2,117,000, a 3.12% increase from 2020.\\nThe metro area population of Austin in 2020 was 2,053,000, a 3.43% increase from 2019."}
{"index": {"_index": "my-nlp-index", "_id": "6"}}
{"text": "Chart and table of population level and growth rate for the Seattle metro area from 1950 to 2023. United Nations population projections are also included through the year 2035.\\nThe current metro area population of Seattle in 2023 is 3,519,000, a 0.86% increase from 2022.\\nThe metro area population of Seattle in 2022 was 3,489,000, a 0.81% increase from 2021.\\nThe metro area population of Seattle in 2021 was 3,461,000, a 0.82% increase from 2020.\\nThe metro area population of Seattle in 2020 was 3,433,000, a 0.79% increase from 2019."}
```

> ### 5.3 search

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 5.3 Search the index
```

> Run neural search to retrieve documents from vector database, then use DeepSeek model to do RAG.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Run vector search to retrieve documents from the vector database, then use the DeepSeek model for RAG:
```

```
GET /my-nlp-index/_search?search_pipeline=my-conversation-search-pipeline-deepseek
{
  "query": {
    "neural": {
      "passage_embedding": {
        "query_text": "What's the population increase of New York City from 2021 to 2023? How is the trending comparing with Miami?",
        "model_id": "USkHsZQBts7fa6bybx3G",
        "k": 5
      }
    }
  },
  "size": 2,
  "_source": [
    "text"
  ],
  "ext": {
    "generative_qa_parameters": {
      "llm_model": "bedrock/claude",
      "llm_question": "What's the population increase of New York City from 2021 to 2023? How is the trending comparing with Miami?",
      "context_size": 5,
      "timeout": 15
    }
  }
}
```

> Response

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The response contains the matching documents:
```
